<p>The history of the Castle is traced back to the fourteenth century with the foundation of Vila Nova de Cerveira. After the signature of the Alcanices Treaty, which established the borders between the reigns of Portugal and Spain, D. Dinis implemented his plan for the settlement of the population and the defence of the borderland. He wrote a letter to his representative in Cerveira letting know his will of settling a small village and building a castle. In 1321, he gave Cerveira his first charter and sent one hundred men to reinforce the settlement of people in this town by the river Minho. He offered privileges to those who were willing to live in Cerveira. Those who had committed crimes, even a serious ones, would be forgiven if they settled here and improved their behaviour.</p>
<p>That’s how the building of this oval-shaped fortress began. It might be considered a castle, but actually it is a kind of a fence, since it encompassed military and sheltering purposes. In fact, private houses and well defined streets have always been seen inside. Even in D. Dinis time it was hard to fit all the hundred settlers’ houses in the fortress. The town had to stretch outside the ramparts. The access to the Castle wasn’t through the door below the Nossa Senhora da Ajuda Chapel, as today, but through the Menagem Tower. The shield of D. Dinis can also be observed on top of that entrance. On the river side, another door was opened, the Door of Betrayal.</p>
<p>The barbican surrounding the castle was added later during the uprising between 1383 and 1385. This lower second line of ramparts might have been built under the command of D. Fernando or D. João.</p>
<p>In 1512, D. Manuel, the first, gave Cerveira a new charter and ordered some works on the castle. The access to the Castle was now made through an entrance at an angle. Those entering the fortress couldn’t go a straight way, they would have to turn a corner, doing a recess movement. Due to the velocity of the attacks, the enemy would be forced to slow down and would get trapped and subjected to the shootings coming from the towers. This way, the door at the Menagem Tower wasn’t no longer needed, so it was immured.</p>
<p>In 1580, the period known as the reign of the Filipes started. Portugal was under Spanish command, thus the border made no sense. The fortresses here were useless. After 1640, immediately after the Restoration of Independence in Portugal, the need to improve the defensive system was felt. In 1660, the outer ramparts of the Castle were erected, in order to reinforce the medieval system and adapt it to the new war tactics. War was no longer made with arches, arrows and swords. Gunpowder and cannon fire were the new weapons. The new ramparts were inclined to support the cannon shots and exhibited four bastions and a half-bastion. They encompassed the whole town, which had stretched outside the castle. The new fence had four doors: to the north, the Valença door; to the south, the Viana door; to the east, the Cortes door and to the west, the Cais door.</p>
<p>In the early nineteenth century, after a long period of military peace, there was the threat of the French Invasions. It was necessary to reinforce the defensive structure, which was a bit degraded. By the time, the people from Cerveira were victorious and forced the Frenchmen to retreat on their attempt to cross the Minho river. Eventually, the French troops invaded Portugal through Chaves. Later, they returned to the province of Minho and Cerveira  and this time things ended badly for the locals: the Frenchmen defeated the Portuguese.</p>
<p>Peaceful times came back and the defensive systems became useless one again. Many privates appropriated of lands near the ramparts and even the ramparts themselves. In 1875, by order of the Municipality, the southern eighteenth century ramparts started to be demolished. However, the appropriation of the old ramparts wasn’t peaceful at all. There was a conflict between the Municipality and the War Ministry, which went on for years until the early twentieth century.</p>
<p>In the twentieth century, under a new mindset on patrimony and after the requalification works of the castle, the process of adapting it into an inn was started. The inn, Pousada de D. Dinis, named after the King, first opened in 1982.</p>
